foreign
[Music]
welcome to heal NPD my name is Dr Mark
eatonson I'm a licensed psychologist
specializing in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues and I'm also author of the book
unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding The Narcissist in your
life the book's a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism from a compassionate
perspective and it's available at Major
book retailers I'll put a link down in
the description
so a couple of weeks ago a friend of
mine asked me to do an episode on
malignant narcissism
and I think you see this term used a lot
on the internet but it's often used
incorrectly to some malignant narcissism
simply emphasizes uh what the person
already understands narcissism to be
it's like saying hot fire or tall
mountain
While others seem to use the term to
refer to a kind of narcissism that's
just really severe like narcissism
turned up to an 11 on the severity dial
to them malignant narcissism is like
catching a bad cold it's still
essentially a cold it's just a really
bad case of it but neither of those ways
of using the term are correct so let's
get into the concept of malignant
narcissism What It Is What It Isn't and
also what experts in the field actually
mean when they use this term
but first I think it's worth a very
brief discussion of the history behind
the term malignant narcissism was first
coined in 1964 by a German social
psychologist psychoanalyst and
philosopher Eric from
Eric Frum was a holocaust Survivor he
fled Germany during the rise of the Nazi
regime
and like many psychologists and
philosophers of his time the events of
World War II had a profound impact on
him his concept of malignant narcissism
was actually his attempt to understand
the psychology behind the toxic ambition
and Evil exhibited by dictators and
tyrants like Adolf Hitler from wrote
that in his opinion malignant narcissism
was the quintessence of human evil
and after from not much was done with
the concept for about 20 years until
Otto kernberg who's a prominent theorist
on the topic of narcissism revived the
term in his 1984 book titled severe
personality disorders
his model really shaped our
understanding of malignant narcissism as
a clinical construct that isn't
explicitly anchored in subjective
Notions of Good and Evil in this
presentation I will mainly be drawing
from kernberg's model because it's by
far the more influential when it comes
to clinical work
so according to kernberg malignant
narcissism has two proper meanings the
first is as a discrete type of
personality disorder that involves a
combination of grandiose NPD and
anti-social personality traits
the Second Use is less common and it
refers to a phase or episode in
narcissistic pathology in which
grandiose defenses that are suffused
with strong primitive aggression come to
the surface and get enacted in
relationships typically the therapy
relationship
so first let's talk about the more
common use and that's malignant
narcissism as a type of personality
disorder malignant narcissists function
at or below the borderline level of
Personality organization and if you want
to know more about what that means I did
a podcast titled is it vulnerable
narcissism or BPD that goes into greater
detail about borderline level
personality organization and I'll link
to that in the description if you're
watching this on YouTube
but basically the word borderline here
doesn't mean borderline personality
disorder instead it refers to a range of
Personality functioning that involves
moderate to severe Psychopathology
BPD actually gets its name from this
concept not the other way around
individuals in the borderline range of
Personality organization experience
moderate to severe disturbances that
create internal discontinuity
distortions of reality and porous or
blurred boundaries between the self and
other people and these disturbances
involve classic borderline level
defenses like splitting projection
projective identification denial
idealization and devaluation and acting
out they also include classic deficits
like identity diffusion feelings of
emptiness low distress tolerance
dysregulated mood and other so-called
pan-neurotic symptoms that sort of run
the gamut of moderate to severe
psychopathology
as with any personality disorder these
disturbances often stem from early
relational trauma that disrupts the
development of realistic integrated
internal models of self and others
so it's important to know that when we
use the term malignant narcissism in
this way as a type of Personality
Disorder it's not the same thing as NPD
it's not simply a severe version of
narcissism it's actually its own
distinct personality style and it
involves four Essential Elements the
first is a narcissistic personality core
the second is anti-social personality
traits the third is something called ego
syntonic sadism and the fourth is
paranoid thinking so let's go through
those uh basically what I want to
emphasize here first is that it differs
in kind not simply in degree from normal
or regular NPD
okay so because of the narcissistic
personality core malignant narcissists
are typically arrogant grandiose envious
and preoccupied with fantasies of power
Brilliance Beauty and perfection
but they also have classical anti-social
traits like lack of remorse contempt or
disregard of social conventions and um
amorality
they have no problem lying stealing
cheating or taking advantage of other
people in pursuit of their goals
now the term ego syntonic sadism means
that there's sort of a perverse pleasure
in causing harm pain or discomfort to
other people
some authors call this a conscious
ideology of aggressive self-affirmation
in which the individual feels Justified
or even in some ways elated to
dehumanize others because they perceive
them through a lens of Envy or disdain
these individuals will typically project
their unconscious feelings of weakness
or Frailty onto other people and then
sort of punish those people for those
projected qualities
they boost their own sense of well-being
of being strong or powerful at the
expense of other people
malignant narcissists also tend to have
a paranoid mistrust of others and that's
because they view them through a lens a
categorical sort of lens as either
enemies or fools or Idols in individuals
with this type of pathology the self is
extremely damaged at a very early stage
of development the ability to recognize
others as human beings with feelings of
their own is actively obliterated within
the personality at an unconscious level
and instead the individual's own needs
feelings and impulses are projected onto
everyone around them they essentially
live in a world that's populated only by
their own projections because they're
unable to sort of see anyone else as a
separate Center of subjective experience
so let's get into why this happens and
again uh this is what I'm about to
describe here is highly theoretical
but you know you may be wondering why
would some individuals develop the
regular version of pathological
narcissism While others develop
malignant narcissism
so as I said earlier
Otto kernberg is one of the most
prominent and influential theorists on
the topic of NPD he uses a theory called
object relations which is a
psychoanalytic model of how we develop
internal images of the self and of other
people
and according to kernberg NPD is the
result and this is regular NPD now it's
the result of a pathological Fusion
between parts of the personality in
defense against something called
primitive aggression
now the term primitive comes up quite
often in psychoanalytic models of
personality disorders and although it
may conjure up images of cavemen the
term is actually referring to defenses
and feelings that are thought to occur
very early in infancy or childhood think
prior to Age Two
uh and this is when feelings of Rage
shame dependency or Terror caused the
child's developing psyche to fragment on
an almost daily basis
so to illustrate try to remember the
last time you screamed or cried the way
a baby does
for most adults such anguish occurs very
rarely because we've developed defenses
to hold ourselves and our grip on
reality together
most adults don't completely fall apart
outside of exceptional circumstances but
young children completely fall apart all
the time when they don't get an ice
cream cone or when they have a wet
diaper basically anytime something
uncomfortable occurs
now psychologists use the term primitive
to describe these experiences because
they haven't been refined or moderated
by more mature psychological defenses
part of the Psychopathology of
personality disorders is that the
individual has not developed reliable
defenses to help mitigate these
so-called primitive feelings and
impulses
they distort reality split off parts of
the self or project unwanted feelings
and self-images onto others and this is
because of relational trauma that
disrupted the development of more mature
realistic and integrated images of the
self and other people
okay so kernberg wrote that NPD is the
result of pathological Fusion between
parts of the personality in defense
against primitive aggression essentially
the individual is defensively organized
in such a way as to minimize dependency
on unreliable exploitative or cruel
caregivers who cause the child to
experience chronic frustration and
overwhelming aggression
now remember young children don't have
mature defenses to keep things in
perspective when frustration and
overwhelming anger occur on a frequent
basis the developing child is forced to
sort of reorganize their internal world
to protect their ability to rely on
caregivers who are hurting them
uh so they create a self-structure that
sort of short circuits dependency and
this self-structure is called a
grandiose self kernberg writes at this
point there is Fusion of Ideal self
ideal object and actual self images as a
defense against an intolerable reality
in the interpersonal Realm in their
fantasies these patients identify
themselves with their own ideal
self-images in order to deny dependency
on external objects basically if you're
already perfect then you don't need
anything and if you don't need anything
then you're not subject to the
overwhelming primitive anger and
aggression that comes up when your needs
are being actively and chronically
denied by caregivers so krenberg is
saying that the child fuses together
their ideal self-image their fantasy of
an ideal or perfect caregiver and their
actual self-image their sense of who
they really are into a pathological
grandiose self
he writes it's as if they were saying I
don't need to fear that I will be
rejected that ideal person and my ideal
image of that person and my real self
are all one and I don't need anyone else
anymore
dependency needs and Associated feelings
that threaten the grandiose self are
split off and repressed by the child to
become self-sufficient and that's
because depending on their caregivers to
meet their emotional needs is too
dangerous at this point feelings of
inadequacy of Rage of dependency and of
primitive anger or aggression they're
split off and they're driven down into
the unconscious
kernberg writes at the bottom lies a
still deeper image of the relationship
with external objects it's the image of
a hungry enraged empty self full of
anger and fearful of a world that seems
as hateful and revengeful as the patient
himself
so to summarize in kernberg's model of
regular NPD the child rearranges parts
of the self in order to defend against
overwhelming anger and primitive
aggression
they figure out a way to in fantasy
become self-sufficient and quote perfect
in order to keep their world from being
overrun by feelings of hate for the very
people they're supposed to love and on
whom they are forced to depend
now the key here is that the grandiose
self is created to protect the child and
their caregivers from the child's own
overwhelming anger and aggression
and this is where malignant narcissism
is different
in malignant narcissism the grandiose
self becomes overrun by the Primitive
aggression it is created to defend
against
the aggression becomes a part of the ego
syntonic experience of self it isn't
disowned repressed or split off
kernberg writes that in contrast to
ordinary narcissistic personality these
patients malignant narcissists
experienced increased self-esteem and
confirmation of the grandiosity when
they can express aggression toward
themselves or other people
and he speculates that there are four
factors that are typically present in
the early childhood of malignant
narcissists
first they experience caregivers as both
omnipotent and sadistic or cruel there's
no psychic escape from the omnipotent
and cruel caregiver who dominates all
aspects of the child's early experience
second the ever-presence of the cruel or
in other words sadistic and omnipotent
caregiver creates a sense in the
developing child that having good loving
or mutually gratifying relationships is
impossible
third the child develops a sense that
total submission to the cruel caregiver
is the only condition for survival
they essentially abandoned the search
for good objects and relationships
instead allowing their developing sense
of self to be overrun by identifications
with the sadistic caregiver who becomes
a part of the child's personality in the
form of something called an interject
and fourth once this identification with
the sadistic or cruel caregiver is
complete a sense of power and Freedom
From Pain fear or dread is experienced
by the child
the child has become the cruel object
that was formally feared and therefore
there's no more need for fear
so in kramberg's model malignant
narcissists are forced to make a
compromise very early in their
psychological development in the face of
a powerful and sadistic caregiver the
child abandons the search for good
objects and a grandiose self is formed
just like in regular narcissism but
unlike in regular narcissism that
self-structure becomes fused with
identifications with the sadistic
caregiver
the malignant narcissist wins Freedom
through submission allowing the
expression of anger hate cruelty and
express and aggression to become the
dominant mode through which connection
with other people is achieved
the grandiose self of malignant
narcissists is propped up by aggression
it collapses in the absence of it
attempts to reach the vulnerable parts
of the individual are actually
experienced by the individual as a
direct assault on the person's core
sense of self and they're met with
immediate cruelty that also serves to
prop up the grandiose self through
identifications with the sadistic object
or caregiver
and this is why sadism and malignant
narcissism is ego syntonic or
experienced as sort of in alignment with
the self and it's also why paranoia is
often present the individual grew up
experiencing constant attacks by the
person or people who were supposed to
care for them the anti-social aspects of
malignant narcissism like lack of
remorse are due to the person's denial
of their own humanity and vulnerability
how can they recognize in other people
what they've sort of abandoned or refuse
or refuse to recognize in themselves
so to illustrate how this personality
type might look the evil queen from Snow
White or the evil stepmother from
Cinderella provide good if exaggerated
prototypical examples these characters
are aloof they're cold arrogant and
they're obsessed with power and vanity
the attempt to humiliate psychologically
destroy or even kill those around them
in pursuit of their own
self-aggrandizement and they experience
No Remorse in the process they inhabit a
psychological landscape that's split
into that which is theirs and therefore
perfect and that which threatens their
status and must therefore be destroyed
okay so that was the first use of the
term malignant narcissism according to
Otto kernberg as a separate personality
disorder that involves aspects of
narcissism anti-social Behavior ego
syntonic sadism and paranoia
the second use of the term is much less
common
so in addition to malignant narcissists
as a type of Personality Disorder
kernberg also recognized that periods of
malignant narcissism may be encountered
in the treatment of regular NPD and
that's due to the difficulty of
resolving the pathological grandiose
self
now remember in kernberg's model the
grandiose self is a fusion of the ideal
self ideal images of others and the
actual self and part of the work of
treatment is to kind of defuse this
structure which then exposes the patient
to the repressed and split off rage
anger shame and aggression that the
grandiose self was created to defend
against in the first place as these
defenses start to loosen the patient may
also be exposed to underlying
identifications with cruel or sadistic
objects internalized images of
caregivers that have become a part of
the personality at an unconscious level
and when these identifications are
threatened by the therapist's kindness
positive regard or sensitivity to the
patient's feelings the patient may begin
to psychologically attack the therapist
and it seems paradoxical that this would
happen but you have to remember that
um the therapist is is disrupting the
status quo the therapist is Awakening
long repressed dependency longings
within the patient and Associated
primitive anger and aggression at never
having had those those emotional needs
met in the first place
the personality sometimes rallies in
defense of the patient deploying the
same tactics that were used against the
patient when they were very young
warmth is met with coldness sensitivity
is met with cruelty and positive regard
is met with derision or devaluation
these so-called malignancies are the
product of an unconscious identification
with the cruel or sadistic caregiver and
they have to be worked through patiently
in the therapy in order to help the
patient let go of those defenses and
open the door to new possibilities
so I guess the take-home Point here
would be that malignant narcissism is
not the same thing as regular NPD
most of our media representations of NPD
are actually of malignant narcissists
which is why they seem so scary
malignant narcissism is actually very
challenging to treat and that's due to
the anti-social sadistic and paranoid
components that are present malignant
narcissists also rarely enter treatment
voluntarily
while people with a sort of regular
pathological narcissism and NPD
periodically or chronically experience a
collapse of their grandiose defenses and
they kind of fall into a vulnerable
expression of the disorder malignant
narcissists don't collapse in the same
way they actively defend against such
Collapse by externalizing any feelings
of weakness or vulnerability and then
behaving cruelly toward other people
um sadistic or cruel treatment of others
in malignant narcissism provides a
feeling of Freedom From Pain fear or
distress and and this is a very
difficult defense to modify in treatment
of patients of this sort should probably
focus more on harm reduction and helping
the patient to find more adaptive ways
of coping rather than attempting to
modify underlying personality structures
so if you're listening to this and
identify with some of these descriptions
of malignant narcissism remember that
I'm describing a theoretical construct
here and that such constructs
necessarily collapse you know complex
Dynamics into simplified models for the
purpose of explanation each of us is far
more complex than any label or diagnosis
but if you do feel that some of these
descriptions match your experience of
yourself then take it seriously seek out
treatment with a qualified mental health
professional none of us is responsible
for the events that shaped our
personality but we are responsible for
what we do about it the better you come
to know yourself the more empowered you
become to make better decisions
okay so that's it for today as always
leave comments questions or suggestions
for future episodes down below and until
next time take good care
[Music]
thank you